OK, Paul Pye, F-Y-E, of Woods Hole Oceanographic.
George Woolard, W-O-O-L-L-A-R-D,
of Hawaii. And Maurice Ewing, E-W-I-N-G, head of
the Lamont. Well, it's called Lamont Geological
Observatory, but it is an oceanographic
institution. Of course, he's dead. He left them a
couple of years ago to come down to Galveston
University in Texas and had their geophysical lab
down there. But I'm thinking to myself, there were
four that at one time were directing four out of the
ten major labs. came out of that small group. They
were all at Woods Hole. They were all at Woods Hole
at the same time. We were all at Woods Hole at the
same time. And then, of course, Columbus Island,
but he was directed at that time, so it doesn't
count. But Five, Willard, Ewing, and the Saw. Now,
did you all work for the Navy? Yeah. Together. We
worked for Woods Hole, Oceanographic, but they
were paid by the Navy. Navy contract. Now, then,
did they, too, go in private enterprise after the
war? No, those three all stayed in the academic
field. Well, that was one of the second questions
we wanted to ask you, was what persuaded you to
leave private enterprise and end up in the
academic world? Oh, the last ten years? Mm-hmm.
Well, frankly, at that time, I wasn't unhappy with
TI, and they weren't unhappy with me, but I got kind
of fed up. industrial world in the sense that,
again, there's no, I'm not throwing rocks at them,
but again, it's a person's own philosophy and
interest. And I suddenly realized I was running a
$12 million division and it brought up
practically nothing. And so what future did I
have? I built it up maybe to $20 million. And that
sort of lost its interest. to me, anyway. And I
thought, instead of having paper as my principal
product, it would be fun to have people as my
principal product. It would be much more
fulfilling and worthwhile. So it wasn't a
question of economics or anything at that time.
This opportunity opened up here at A&M. Well, it
had the oceanography department. I was asked to
take it. So I had always planned somewhere down the
road for too long to go into it. teaching on a
university level. So I just moved up my schedule
since the offer was a department head in
oceanography, and not too many of those
available, and accelerated my, you might say,
retirement schedule from industry and go in the
academic world. Yeah. You suggest, though, that
private exploration should soon match
government expenses in terms of oceanography.
Does this come from your experience at TI? What was
that quote again? Well, that in an article you
wrote, you suggested that perhaps private
enterprise and private exploration should begin
to bear more of the cost of oceanography and the
developments in oceanography. Does this come
from your experience at TI? You predict that
government investment will drop in oceanography
and that private investments will increase.
Yeah, right, because as we look to the sea more and
more for raw materials and everything else that
the industry has to get involved more. And so
naturally, they should contribute something to
oceanography. Now, of course, a lot of the
individual companies have been supporting not
only our department with unrestricted grants and
so on, but other oceanographic institutions as
well. So they are beginning to play more and more of
their part and their role and carry their share in
these activities, particularly the oil
companies. Oceanography Department, we're
getting unrestricted grants and have been for
some time now, ever since I've been here, from
Humble. And we've had some help from Amoco and the
DuPont people. Just to name a few. So they are
moving more in that direction. Do you think one of
the attractions for the university, for you, that
is one of the reasons you appealed to the
university as head of the department, was your
knowledge of private enterprise? your ability to
secure grants? I wouldn't be at all surprised,
plus my experience with the government, too,
having been involved indirectly in the
government through withhold over the Navy
contract and whatnot. Yeah, that is a fact. In
fact, I came here at an era, you might say, when the
university was looking for people the department
has with industrial experience, because at that
time, they also got Dr. Spencer in geophysics who
comes from industry. The dean of the College of
Sciences, Dr. Zener, came from Westinghouse, the
previous one. And, oh, there were three or four
other people in the middle 60s that came here to
ministry. The department head of the math
department came to ministry. Whom did you look for
to bring to your department with you? What sort of
people did you try to hire? Who were they? And what
did you aim the early department towards being, if
I may? Well, actually, I didn't bring anybody from
industry per se into the department directly,
although I have hired people since I've been here
who came from industry, like Dr. Rezak, for
example, who came from Shell.
But one of the first things I wanted to do when I came
here at that time, there were nine on the faculty,
nine or ten, I forget which, was to broaden it. The
emphasis had been pretty much on physical
oceanography, with the other branches of
oceanography thinly represented and being more
or less the handmaidens, I think, for the
department as a whole. So since I've come here,
rightly or wrongly, depending on who you talk to, I
have broadened and improved, you might say, the
balance between the different major branches of
oceanography. Of course, right now, it's not a
numerical balance. We don't divide the 27 faculty
members by four. We couldn't anyway. We could not
even. But we do have strong chemical oceanography
group and geological and biological to match an
excellent and strong and well-recognized
physical oceanography group.
Well, in terms of the government, would you
explain your work with the President's
Commission?
Well, the President's Commission on Marine
Resources, etc., etc., was a culmination of an
era, again, where there was a lot of visibility and
a lot of gung-ho-ness for oceanography. In an
effort to get the thing into a position
financially and otherwise, it might do more
toward exploiting the oceans. I use the term
exploit not in the negative sense. And the
legislative history behind the Marine
Commission goes back about ten years. And it took
about that long to get enough momentum and
interest and visibility in the Congress and
backing the Congress to come up finally with a bill
which set up the Marine Council in one hand and the
Marine Commission on the other. And the purpose of
the Marine Commission was to draw up a plan for the
orderly and accelerated development of the
oceans, with emphasis on the role, of course, of
the United States And the commission consisted
of, I guess, 10 or 11 people who were appointed by
the president, which Dr. Stratton was the
chairman. At that time, he was president emeritus
of MIT. Well, he still is. And I was appointed the
vice chairman. And actually, there was only one
other oceanographer on the commission, and
that's Johnny Knauss from Rhode Island. All the
others were from various branches of industry or
the government. and two legislators,
Congressman Mosier, and who was the senator we had
on there? So it was a pretty good mix of
legal, political, sociological, and last but no
means least, two people from the oceanographic
community. try and come to grips with a myriad of
problems in these different areas that would
naturally arise in trying to develop a plan for the
orderly acceleration and development and
exploitation of the ocean. What it triggered,
too, was we were supposed to come up with a plan to
streamline oceanography in the government,
because at that time there were about 40 or 45
different agencies, sub-agencies, and what have
you that had their finger in the pie in one way or
another in oceanography or ocean-related
activities. The theory was to find out about this
fragmentation and then try to put together
something that would have critical mass but also
have enough clout so it continued to grow and
develop and be of some good in the form of a single
agency. And the outgrowth of that was what's now
NOAA. one of the recommendations we made, which is
in the Commerce Department now. But it turned out
that one of the difficulties was that not only was
there proliferation within the government
agencies in oceanography, but there was
proliferation within the legislative branch and
committees and so on, where there were about 40 or
45 agencies involved in oceanography in various
degrees. More than that, committees. And if we'd
had the guts to make another important
recommendation, which we didn't,
unfortunately, we would have said that not only
streamline the agencies that are involved in
oceanography, but streamline the congressional
committees. Because this way, each of the
agencies now involve oceanography. And NOAA
isn't the only one, by any means. But it has been
culled down to maybe half a dozen or a dozen. have to
appear before a whole myriad of different
committees to defend their budget and do what they
want and hearings and so on. So it's still a can of
worms legislatively, even though otherwise it's
sort of streamlined down. Although since then,
with all the hue and cry about ecology and
environment, it's started to proliferate even
more because we have outfits like BLM, Bureau of
Land Management, that are in the sea that have
never been in the sea before. The USGS has suddenly
got a pot full of money, and they've gone to see. And
now
the EPA and the IRDA is in the act. So it's about
time, I guess, to have another commission to call
the attention of the world at large, and the
taxpayer in particular. We're, again,
proliferating the point with nonsense. Did you
serve with Treadwell on this commission? No, at
that time, Captain Treadwell was still with the
Navy as the commander of the Naval Ocean Graphics
Office, although we did lean very heavily on him
and the staff for data and input that the
commission needed from time to time. He later on
actually went with the council, the Marine
Council, and he was there when he came with us. The
council was the governmental counterpart of the
commission. The council consisted of
representative on a cabinet-level basis from
each of the different departments of the US
government. They were involved in oceanography,
and they were trying to keep the house in order of
government agencies involved in oceanography.
Right, heard on that. All right, then. If I
understand it, the purpose of the commission and
the council, then, was to streamline the
bureaucratic agencies who had some influence in
the sea. Right, and try and come up with a unified
agency. With one, which is NOAA. Which is now NOAA,
although it's by no means unified. And the other
thing was to come up with a plan how to do it and how
much it would cost to, which of the plan which would
be used to accelerate the orderly development, if
you can do such a thing, accelerate the orderly
development of the expansion of the ocean, the
potential of the oceans, the wealth of the oceans.
for use of mankind in general and the U.S. in
particular. Was part of this to establish
priorities then as to where the national interest
would lie in the oceans, as to which would be the
more important things to put the money into first?
That would be part of it, to establish priorities.
How did this relate to private industry? What were
some of the findings, some of the final outcomes of
this as far as how much stimulus should be given to
the private industry, such as oil research
offshore and other endeavors such as this? Well,
we had a special subcommittee, you might say, of
the commission. Not just one, we had five of them.
And one directed toward environment,
environmental questions and problems. And
another one toward legislative problems. One
toward manpower. And then one toward private
industry. That was the one I was chairman of, the
subcommittee for private industry. And there was
a lot of talk about just how you could get private
industry into the act and help it along without
subsidizing it, like we've subsidized the
railroads and the airlines and the barge canals
and everything else. One idea there was a group
within the commission tried to push, but didn't
get too far, was to have something similar to
ComSat. It's a quasi-governmental private
organization that puts commercial satellites in
the orbit for telephone communication and
whatnot. And I was one of them. I was a ringleader of
a ComSat for oceanography. But if there was
another group, for whatever reason, I'll never
know, I guess, unless maybe we just claim that
self-serving and self-seeking manages to squash
it. And the reason I say that was because there were
a couple of people from government agencies on the
commission, and they would foresee not wanting to
have too great a role for private industry,
because that might cut back their role. And so the
ComSat type of development for the oceans never
materialized. I think it would have been a big step
forward, just as it has been for communications
and satellites. On the other hand, in all
fairness, AT&T, since the development of ComSat,
has spent more of their own money laying good
old-fashioned 125-year-old telegraph cables
across the oceans rather than rely on the
satellites. I don't know. It may not have been the
fantasy I thought it might have been. Did you make
any specific recommendations coming out of the
commission that you could quickly and succinctly
Well, let's see. The commission started nine
years ago, and it lasted for almost two years. One
of the first things we did was extend our life a year
because we realized we could never solve the
problems properly, come up with a plan in one year.
But that was one good thing about that bill. It had a
self-destruction, as a friend said on TV, that the
commission originally had to go out of business in
one year. We did get a one-year extension, but that
was it. And the same with the Marine Council. one of
the few governmental bills ever written that is
self-destructing for a commission of an agency.
But what I was leading up to was that it's been,
well, five or six years or more since I've opened
up, you know, a commission report and the
particular report of the committee on the private
enterprise, so all I can think of is the
generalities. Do you have a copy of the commission
report? No. Then I'll give you one. I was just
reminiscing about the concept of a way to
implement the development and the involvement of
the private sector into it, because that was one of
the things that got so heavily involved. This
is the summary. In addition to this, there are five
other volumes, each one representing the summary
of the five different committees I just
mentioned, or subcommittees. So I think you'll
find in there what you need.
Oh, yeah. The management of the coastal zone was
another subcommittee, marine resources, global
environment. And there should be some way to... We
don't actually have one for the committee on
private enterprise. It's...
Well, it's... It's mixed around 100 marine
resources and around technical operating
services. I do have copies downstairs on the third
floor of each of these others. If you want to look at
them, I think this is enough. All right. It's
called Our Nation in the Sea. Yeah.
Let's see if they get some more coffee. I don't
know.
And also that tribal language. You were making
some comments about my dialect before, but that
tribal language is most interesting. These are
people in Washington? Yeah. Six words will do it,
they'll never use one. Yeah. They all have things
like... Were there any particular congressmen
who offered you, collectively or individually,
proper support for the commission? Yeah, well,
Congressman Mosher, I think, was really the
outstanding one, from a standpoint of a
congressman. And then in the senatorial side,
there was Magnuson, I think he was, Magnuson from
the state of Washington, and Kell from Rhode
Island, two of the mainstays.
They were all very helpful. So the Commission
lasted for two years, you met once a month for
several days at a time in Washington, and then
brought in subcommittee reports. Right. Oh, then
also we had hearings, but of course the hearings
were not for the Commission as such, but we had
subcommittee hearings all over the country,
usually on Seaport and the County of Great Lakes
and Seaport City. Would you want to judge this
effectiveness of the President's Commission?
Yeah.
It's all the blood, sweat, and tears I've put in
this thing. Its completion couldn't have come at a
worse time because it was, after all, the Lyndon B.
Johnson Commission in the eyes of the
Republicans, although there were, at that time,
two Republicans on it, Baird and myself, although
I've since no longer claimed to be a Republican.
I'm an independent. But be that as it may, if you can
answer your timing aspect of it, it couldn't have
come at a worse time because no matter how good it
might have been the Bible itself, it was generated
by opposing party, in effect. And had Humphrey
been elected, I'm sure there was another person,
if Humphrey had been elected, he would have used it
as a blueprint in the Bible and implemented it to
the best of his ability. He probably is the most
outstanding, most helpful person in this whole
business. I don't know why I didn't think of him
before in that connection. By then, when Nixon got
through president, He wouldn't have anything to
do with it because, for the reason I just
mentioned, what he did was set up a series of task
forces to take our commission report and
practically rework it and start all over again.
And this got a lot of people mad, including my wife,
who wrote him a letter and said that We spent $2
million of taxpayers' money and untold months of
my time away from her, and she thought this was
stupid to reinvent the wheel. And I laughed at her
when she wrote the letter. I said, no, it won't do
any good. I said, you won't get an answer. I said,
you do get an answer if you're formal and say thank
you for writing us a letter. But she never even got a
postcard acknowledging it. So these guys did go
and reinvent the wheel, and fortunately not to the
extent of $2 million. But we did spend a lot of time.
They did invite some of the commission members in
as consultants and make comments on what they came
up with and whatnot. And so, in all due respect, not
to Nixon, but to these cohorts that he had on these
task forces, they did recommend to him to
implement the commission along the lines, of
course, that they had thought up and dreamt up in
what now is NOAA. The other thing that we had
recommended, in addition to the NOAA type of
operation, was also a NATOA, the Advisory
Committee. But we said that the Advisory
Committee to NOAA should report directly to the
president, so they wouldn't have any strings
attached to it. Instead of that, they modified
that to having the COA report directly to the Dr.
White, the head of NOAA. And he pays the travel and
expenses and the consulting. So naturally, he
gets the kind of We party won. No, no, but I'm into
that. I mean, he's in business and that's his job.
Although when I told him about it after it
happened, he said, no, nothing like that. Well,
that's the postmortem, you might say, on what
happened to the commission in detail after we
changed administrations. Now, it was a sad day for
oceanography when Humphrey wasn't elected
president, because he really would have pushed
it. I think Nixon's advisors figured how many
boats do the fish have? Forget about it. Are you
satisfied presently with the sort of support the
government is giving the development of
oceanography?
I don't know what I could really answer that
because I'm not an unbiased, objective person
when it comes to that. Human nature being what it
is, my answer is no. You can say I have an ax to grind,
but you just look at the numbers. We're worse off
now if we use 1966 dollars or 68 dollars in hard
dollars than we were then. Sure, the actual number
of dollars that the government is putting in
oceanography you can show is more than it was in
1966-68. There hasn't been enough added, but the
buying power is even equivalent to 1966-68. As
recently as 1970, our ONR contract was $1 million.
Since then, it's dropped off to $400,000 or
$500,000. And not only that, but we're fortunate
to get that much because Other institutions have
been dropped entirely. ONR put it the other way
around. ONR has quit funding a number of other
institutions. Same way with NSF. They're right on
down the line. But what has happened since this big
ecology and environmental bust has descended on
us, the money is now going into not blue water or
deep water oceanography. It's going into outfits
like EPA, BLM, What does BLM stand for? Bureau of
Land Management. And so from that standpoint,
there has been a big increase in funding in
oceanography. Of course, again, it depends on how
you want to define oceanography. I mean, here we go
in the bays and estuaries and it's still
oceanography. But it's not oceanography in the
sense that we hope to develop the resources from
the oceans that we had in mind when we drew up the
plan for the commission. And, of course, this has
helped us as a department. We probably, again,
because we have access to our own submersible and
have a unique capability, we've gotten, by now,
I'd say well over a million and a half dollars worth
of research out of these new outfits like DLM and
the Marine Branch of the USGS and whatnot. One of
the reasons it's difficult to answer your
question, yes or no, is because it goes into your
definition. What's oceanography?
Where it all comes from and just what the total
oceanography dollar is. If you want to include
things on these new agencies in the oceanography,
maybe we've gone up a little bit, but nothing in
line of what was necessary to implement the plan
that we're talking about in the commission
report. If I recall correctly, President Nixon,
shortly before his rapid decline and demise, came
up with a pledge for working on the energy crisis by
pouring money into science to work on the energy
problem that was supposed to be on the scale of the
Manhattan Project. And I'm wondering if anything
ever came of that. And I won't answer that question
myself, but I wonder if anything came of that and
what offshoots came off in oceanography for
energy. Well, what came of that, I think, is
indirectly fed back in oceanography was a big pot
of money given the U.S. Geological Survey to do
work on a continental shelf in connection with
finding oil and getting data to help regulate the
oil economy and so on. They've had more money now.
They don't know what to do with it. Like Dr.
Baumann, who used to be on the faculty, went
with... US Geos in Menlo Park as part of that
recruiting program that they put on across the
nation for people to work on the money they've
gotten and the projects that they have since then.
ERDA is another one. They've gotten quite a bit of
money for, again, you might say if you want to call
it oceanography because it is in the saltwater
area. which they didn't have before for this type
of purpose. I don't know whether you're aware of
that workshop we have next year for two days. We got
a contract not too long ago from IRDA, which is a
management contract for oceanographic research
necessary to help IRDA solve their problems in the
Gulf of Mexico. And we're having a two-day
workshop and bringing in about 40 or 45 people from
the whole Gulf of Mexico area in oceanographic
institutions and marine orient institutions to,
through this workshop, come up with ideas of what
ERDA needs to do in a way of not so much a data
gathering, per se, the way BLM and EPA and the
others are doing, but solve processes involved in
energy-related activities in the Gulf of Mexico,
in our particular case. Not only oil, but nuclear
power plants, wave power and wave, and so on.
Professor Spilhaus seemed to think that
environmental legislation interfered with
proper exploitation of fuel resources. Would you
agree with that?
Well, it had and it should to a certain extent, but
it shouldn't interfere to the extent of being
unrealistic to the point where we throw the baby
out with the bathwater, that we have a wonderful
environment with no energy coming from it. I mean,
there's business about strip mining, for
example, on land, and leaving it to the conditions
that it has in the past. I don't approve of that. But
on the other hand, the pendulum always overshoots
and overreacts. And what they're talking about
now, to get the thing back into shape after the land
has been used for strip mining, is just
unrealistic and burgeoning territory. But I feel
strongly that they should put the thing back into
some semblance of use for other purposes. But some
of the constraints that are laid out, like an
environmental impact statement and so on, it's
just entirely unrealistic if you want to have any
energy at an economic price. This last series of
questions lead for me to ask for comments on four
things from you. What would you suppose the future
is going to be in oil and the environment in terms of
oceanography? Do you expect more or less
restrictions or more things asked of you in terms
of offshore drillings? Well, I don't think I can
ask for even more things they're doing now on the
environmental impact statement as manifested by
agencies like the USGS, the Bureau of Land
Management, and so on. They have to do more than
what we're asked to do now. I don't mean actually in
dollars or amounts, but I mean in additional
things.